Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley (UK: /ˈwʊlstənkrɑːft/, US: /-kræft/; née Godwin; 30 August 1797
– 1 February 1851) was an English novelist who wrote the Gothic novel Frankenstein; or, The
Modern Prometheus (1818). She also edited and promoted the works of her husband, the
Romantic poet and philosopher Percy Bysshe Shelley. Her father was the political philosopher
William Godwin and her mother was the philosopher and feminist Mary Wollstonecraft.
Shelley's mother died less than a month after giving birth to her. She was raised by her father
who was able to provide her with a rich if informal education, encouraging her to adhere to his
own anarchist political theories. When she was four, her father married a neighbor with whom
Shelley came to have a troubled relationship.
In 1814, Shelley began a romance with one of her father's political followers, Percy Bysshe
Shelley, who was already married. Together with her stepsister, Claire Clairmont, she and
Percy left for France and traveled through Europe. Upon their return to England, Shelley was
pregnant with Percy's child. Over the next two years, she and Percy faced ostracism, constant
debt and the death of their prematurely born daughter. They married in late 1816, after the
suicide of Percy Shelley's first wife, Harriet.
In 1816, the couple famously spent a summer with Lord Byron, John William Polidori and
Claire Clairmont near Geneva, Switzerland, where Shelley conceived the idea for her novel
Frankenstein. The Shelleys left Britain in 1818 for Italy, where their second and third children
died before Shelley gave birth to her last and only surviving child, Percy Florence Shelley. In
1822, her husband drowned when his sailing boat sank during a storm near Viareggio. A year
later, Shelley returned to England and from then on devoted herself to the upbringing of her
son and a career as a professional author. The last decade of her life was dogged by illness,
most likely caused by the brain tumour which killed her at age 53.
Until the 1970s, Shelley was known mainly for her efforts to publish her husband's works and
for her novel Frankenstein, which remains widely read and has inspired many theatrical and
film adaptations. Recent scholarship has yielded a more comprehensive view of Shelley's
achievements. Scholars have shown increasing interest in her literary output, particularly in
her novels, which include the historical novels Valperga (1823) and Perkin Warbeck (1830), the
apocalyptic novel The Last Man (1826) and her final two novels, Lodore (1835) and Falkner
(1837). Studies of her lesser-known works, such as the travel book Rambles in Germany and
Italy (1844) and the biographical articles for Dionysius Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopaedia (1829–
1846), support the growing view that Shelley remained a political radical throughout her life.
Shelley's works often argue that cooperation and sympathy, particularly as practiced by women
in the family, were the ways to reform civil society. This view was a direct challenge to the
individualistic Romantic ethos promoted by Percy Shelley and the Enlightenment political
theories articulated by her father, William Godwin.